docs: Performing-an-ABUpdate (#224)
microsoft/trident: docs/Tutorials/Performing-an-AB-Update.md

# Performing an A/B Update

> ## Introduction

Reviewer: NIT: Maybe for another PR - but we should either change the way the cards show up in the folder, or have a best practice that each page starts with a short one liner that will show up nicely, or doesn't show a line at all, etc. Otherwise, all cards end up saying "Introduction"

<img width="994" height="450" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/d27681a8-fe1f-4c00-b926-0239f2cead1a" />

Author: removing the `## Introduction` makes a truncated version of the intro text show there.  maybe at some point we do a mass removal of it?

Trident can be used to service an operating system, running either on bare metal or virtual machines.  To accomplish this, Trident uses an [A/B Update](../Reference/Glossary.md#ab-update) strategy.

This document describes how to build an update image, create an update Trident Host Configuration, and execute an update with `trident update`.

## Prerequisites

1. Ensure that [oras](https://oras.land/docs/installation/) is installed.

> 2. Ensure [Image Customizer container](https://microsoft.github.io/azure-linux-image-tools/imagecustomizer/quick-start/quick-start.html) is accessible.

Author: i'm not sure we care if the quick start is accessible, just that the container is?

3. Ensure SSH key pair exists (assumed in this tutorial to be `$HOME/.ssh/id_rsa.pub`)
4. A bare metal machine (via [Hello World](./Trident-Hello-World.md)) or virtual machine (via [Onboard a VM to Trident](./Onboard-a-VM-to-Trident.md)) has been provisioned.

## Instructions

### Step 1: Download the minimal base image

Pull [minimal-os](../Reference/Glossary.md#minimal-os) as a base image from MCR by running:

``` bash
mkdir -p $HOME/staging
pushd $HOME/staging
oras pull mcr.microsoft.com/azurelinux/3.0/image/minimal-os:latest
popd
```

> ### Step 2: Get Trident RPMs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 2: Build and Install Trident RPMs
```

Build the Trident RPMs by running:

``` bash
make bin/trident-rpms.tar.gz
```

After running this make command, the RPMs will be built and packaged into `bin/trident-rpms.tar.gz` and unpacked into `bin/RPMS/x86_64`:

``` bash
$ ls bin/RPMS/x86_64/
trident-0.3.DATESTRING-dev.COMMITHASH.azl3.x86_64.rpm
trident-install-service-0.3.DATESTRING-dev.COMMITHASH.azl3.x86_64.rpm
trident-provisioning-0.3.DATESTRING-dev.COMMITHASH.azl3.x86_64.rpm
trident-service-0.3.DATESTRING-dev.COMMITHASH.azl3.x86_64.rpm
trident-static-pcrlock-files-0.3.DATESTRING-dev.COMMITHASH.azl3.x86_64.rpm
trident-update-poll-0.3.DATESTRING-dev.COMMITHASH.azl3.x86_64.rpm
```

Copy RPMs to staging folder:

``` bash
cp -r bin/RPMS $HOME/staging
```

> ### Step 3: Create Image Customizer Configuration for Update

Reviewer: "Image Customizer" is a bit wordy and makes this hard to read for people who don't use IC daily. What about leaving out the tool from the title?

```suggestion
### Step 3: Define an Update Image Configuration
```

Author: i guess for tutorial i tried to be explicit ... especially because we have a host configuration and an ic configuration.

Author: if i were new to the project, i might find image configuration frustrating unless it is explained somewhere

> For an update COSI, we need to provide only an esp and the updated partitions. `trident` was not created as an [A/B volume pair](../Reference/Glossary.md#ab-volume-pair) and therefore cannot be serviced, so it is not included.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For an update COSI, we need to provide only an esp and the updated partitions. The `trident` partition does not have an [A/B volume pair](../Reference/Glossary.md#ab-volume-pair) and does not need to be serviced, so it is not included. The same would go for any data or other none-serviced partition.
```

> Interesting to note that Image Customizer reflects the OS image, which will be laid out onto a single partition at a time: either A or B. So, the [A/B volume pairs](../Reference/Glossary.md#ab-volume-pair) will not be reflected in the Image Customizer config.  This is why `root` is specified here unlike the `root-a` or `root-b` found in the Trident Host Configuration.

Reviewer: Nit

```suggestion
Image Customizer reflects the update OS image, which will be laid out onto a single partition at a time: either A _or_ B. So, the [A/B volume pairs](../Reference/Glossary.md#ab-volume-pair) will not be reflected in the Image Customizer config.  This is why `root` is specified here unlike the `root-a` or `root-b` found in the Trident Host Configuration.
```

``` yaml
  packages:
    install:
      - trident-service

  services:
    enable:
      - trident
```

To put all of that together, create the update Image Customization configuration file like this:

``` bash
cat << EOF > $HOME/staging/ic-config-update.yaml
storage:
  bootType: efi
  disks:
    - maxSize: 5G
      partitionTableType: gpt
      partitions:
        - id: esp
          size: 8M
          type: esp
        - id: root
          size: 4G

  filesystems:
    - deviceId: esp
      mountPoint:
        options: umask=0077
        path: /boot/efi
      type: fat32
    - deviceId: root
      mountPoint: /
      type: ext4

os:
  bootloader:
    resetType: hard-reset
  hostname: updated-testimage

  kernelCommandLine:
    extraCommandLine:
      - rd.info
      - log_buf_len=1M

  packages:
    remove:
      - grub2-efi-binary

    install:
      # replace grub2-efi-binary with grub2-efi-binary-noprefix
      - grub2-efi-binary-noprefix
      - curl
      - dnf
      - efibootmgr
      - iproute
      - iptables
      - jq
      - lsof
      - netplan
      - openssh-server
      - trident-service
      - vim

  services:
    enable:
      - trident
EOF
```

> ### Step 4: Invoke Image Customizer to Create an Update COSI File

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Step 4: Create an Update COSI 
```

From previous steps, the Trident RPMs, a base image (`image.vhdx`) and Image Customizer configuration file (`ic-config-update.yaml`) are all found in `$HOME/staging`.

Invoke Image Customizer, again paying special attention to [specify](https://microsoft.github.io/azure-linux-image-tools/imagecustomizer/api/cli.html#--output-image-formatformat) `--output-image-format=cosi`:

``` bash
pushd $HOME/staging
docker run \
    --rm \
    --privileged=true \
    -v /dev:/dev \
    -v ".:/staging:z" \
    mcr.microsoft.com/azurelinux/imagecustomizer:0.18.0 \
        --image-file "/staging/image.vhdx" \
        --config-file "/staging/ic-config-update.yaml" \
        --rpm-source "/staging/RPMS/x86_64" \
        --build-dir "/build" \
        --output-image-format "cosi" \
        --output-image-file "/staging/osimage-update.cosi"
popd
```

### Step 5: Create Trident Host Configuration for Update

> To update our existing installation, we need a new Host Configuration file. In this case, we are only changing the OS based on a new COSI file that was created in step 4. In essence, the Host Configuration file used to deploy the initial operating system can be used as a basis, only changing the COSI file reference:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To update our existing installation, we need a new Host Configuration file that represents our desired state. In this case, we are only changing the OS based on a new COSI file that was created in step 4. In essence, the Host Configuration file used to deploy the initial operating system can be used as a basis, only changing the COSI file reference:
```
